### The myth of Hephaistos

According to the Homeric account, *Hephaistos* was son of the king of gods, *Zeus*, and one of the twelve Olympians, sister and wife of Zeus, *Hera*. It was believed that with such parents he would be powerful and handsome. As a baby, *Hephaistos* was instead small and ugly, with red and distorted face. *Hera* was so horrified at the sight of *Hephaistos* that she threw him off the top of Mount Olympus when he was a baby. It is said that he fell for a day and a night and then plunged into the Mediterranean sea, near the island of *Lemnos*. When he hit the water, it broke one of his legs. This never healed properly and it was noticeable when *Hephaistos* walked. He went deep into the sea where the marine deities *Thetis* and *Eurynome* received him, and he dwelt with them for nine years under the custody of the Titan *Oceanus*, making a variety of ornaments for them. It was, according to some accounts, during this period that *Hephaistos* made the golden chair by which he punished his mother, and from which he would not release her till he was prevailed upon by *Dionysus*. Although Hephaestus afterwards remembered the cruelty of his mother, yet he was always kind towards her. *Hera* in turn rewarded her son's affection giving him *Aphrodite*, goddess of beauty, as wife. According to Greek myths, *Aphrodite* had a long list of suitors which included *Poseidon*, god of the sea, *Hermes*, the messenger god, and *Ares*, the god of war. This led to several quarrels on the Mount Olympus and in order to bring peace among gods, *Hera* decided that *Aphrodite* would be married to her son *Hephaistos*. To *Hera*, he was the ideal candidate to diffuse the situation, the one who least desired *Aphrodite* among all others.

I picked the myth of *Hephaistos* for this project because of the troubled vicissitudes of his character, and the alternation of fortunes and misfortunes. This, in my opinion, embodies the relationship between fire and the Mediterranean basin. More on this in the paragraphs below.

### The Mediterranean - crossroad of cultures and biodiversity hotspot

The Mediterranean Basin is a meeting point of three continents, Europe, Asia and Africa, and this is responsible for the great diversity of plants, animals and cultures that formed the cradle of Western civilization. It is considered one of the biodiversity hotspots ([Myers et al. 2000](10.1038/35002501)) because of its high species richness and high proportion of endemisms ([Thompson 2005](https://doi.org/10.2307/25065481)). The total area showing a mediterranean-type climate (MTC) is about 2.3 million sq.km, with transitions toward temperate forest ecosystems (in the European mountains) and toward arid ecosystems (in North Africa and the Near East). It is not only the largest of the five MTC regions, but also the most geographically complex (with more than 40.000 km of rough coast in different peninsulas and islands) as well as the most socio-economically, culturally and politically varied. Elevations range up to 3756 m in the east (the highest peak in the Taurus mountains, Turkey) and up to 4167 m in the west (the highest peak in the Atlas mountains, Morocco). There are many volcanoes in Italy and the Aegean Islands, with frequent minor eruptions and rare major explosions. The MTC region of the basin corresponds to a narrow rim around the Mediterranean Sea, and includes: (1) in southern Europe, most of the Iberian peninsula (Portugal and Spain), south of France, most of Italy and Greece, the coast of Croatia, Montenegro and Albania; (2) in southwest Asia (the Near East), Cyprus, Lebanon, Palestine, Israel, most of Turkey, and the coast of Syria; and (3) in North Africa (the Magreb), the north of Tunisia, Algeria, Morocco and small coastal areas of Libya. It also includes all the islands in the Mediterranean Sea.

In general terms, summers are hot and dry and winters are mild and relatively wet; winters may be cold in the interior areas with a continental climate influence (e.g. central Spain and central Turkey). The configuration of seas, peninsulas and islands, and the topographic complexity of the area, produce a great regional variety of weather and climate. Rainfall ranges from semi-arid conditions (<300 mm) up to over 2000 mm, and peaks in autumn and spring (in the west) and in autumn and winter (in the east). Because of the air masses' trajectories, the wettest parts of the basin are typically the western parts of the peninsulas (Iberian, Italian and Balkan peninsulas). There are also clear gradients from the colder and wetter northwest (southern France and northern Iberia) to the hotter and more arid south and southeast parts of the basin (North Africa and the Near East). The temperature-moderating effect of the sea is highest in the west (Atlantic coast) and lessens toward the east (water temperatures rise from west to east).

> Text sourced from *Fire in the Mediterranean Basin* ([Keeley et al. 2011](https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139033091.006))

### The case study: wildfire in Cyprus
